MOTIVATIONS AND AIMS

Our Motivation?

With an increase in awareness surrounding social issues, protests have been becoming more frequent around the world. This has become especially true during the current COVID-19 pandemic, as society has become increasingly reliant on social media, where information regarding these protests is easily diffused. As such, this project aims to evaluate protests and their formation, with a guiding question of whether these protests truly improve the political and economic instability within countries. 

Our Scope?

To narrow our scope, we decided to focus this research and analysis on the Arab Spring, as this movement represents important points of data on protests. The following provides context on the protests and proves the significance of the movement.

Background
The Arab Spring was a pro-democracy movement that took place in the Middle East and North Africa from 2010 to mid-2012. It began with the so-called Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia and later spread to Libya, Egypt, Yemen, Syria and Bahrain, where rulers were either deposed or riots would continue for years. Smaller protests linked to this revolution appeared in Algeria, Kuwait, Oman, Sudan, Saudi Arabia, Morocco, Iran, Iraq and Lebanon. In the Middle East, most of the countries were under authoritarian and corrupt regimes, and had high levels of wealth inequality. In addition, in the cases of Tunisia and Yemen, both countries undertook particularly impressive revolutions. In Tunisia, the Jasmine Revolution was a popular uprising against corruption, poverty, and political oppression that led to the destitution of President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali in January 2011. It began with the self-immolation of Mohammed Bouazizi, a young fruit and vegetable vendor in Sidi Bouzid in front of a local municipal office, after he was being mistreated by the police. This event led to the first demonstration in the city which inspired others in the country. The protests concluded when Ben Ali fled to Saudi Arabia and was charged for manslaughter, drug trafficking, and conspiracy against the State.  In Yemen, President Ali Abd Alla Saleh held power for three decades, binding the country to an economically underdeveloped stage. In late January 2011, thousands of protesters gathered in important cities to dethrone him. At the beginning, the demonstrations took place with little violence between protesters and security officers. Then, Salih loyalists opened fire on protesters on March 18, killing at least 50 people. Even as clashes intensified between police and protesters, Salih still refused several times to sign the agreement that would remove him from power. The protests finally concluded when he transferred his authority to Vice President Hadi.

As such, we will be collecting data and creating visualizations for the following fourteen countries linked to the Arab Spring: Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iraq, Iran, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, and Yemen. Furthermore, we will only be analyzing the past two decades. This is because these years are the most relevant to protest data, with the Arab Spring occurring right in the middle of this time period, allowing for analysis prior to and after this important movement.

Our Aim?

With our website, we aim to bring attention to the upwards trend of protests and prompt discussion of their formations, in particular by looking at the quantity of and reasons behind these protests. As we have already shown in our intro, the prevalence and significance of protests in our world today can be proved. Therefore, we must look at the reasons causing protests as it will allow us to prove or disprove the theory that protests occur due to political and economic instability. 
With regards to the Arab Spring, although the overall education level increased in the region (Campante and Chor, 2012, p.172), it still had the highest unemployment rate in the world in 2005: 14,3 % (Nimrod Raphaeli, 2006). According to Huntington (1968, p.48), higher education did not always provide the needed skills for the market. This gap between highly educated students and a poor labor market creates instability which causes rebellious movement. Indeed, according to Campante and Chor, the well educated young people are the most eager to be politically engaged in protests (2012, p.177). Thus, it is suggested that these protests are associated with an overall political, social and economical context in favor of rebellion where corruption and unemployment are the main triggers. 
As a result, we also aim to reveal whether or not protests can bring awareness to and improve a country’s economic and political instability to determine the usefulness of protests today. It is important to note that corruption and unemployment are the main triggers of protests. By analyzing these two social indicators, unemployment rate and corruption index, we aim to be able to determine if economic and political factors are truly correlated to protests, and see how protests can affect these indicators. 

Our Objectives?

In order to achieve our aim, we have three main objectives:

Process data on protests in general and economic and political social indications (unemployment rate and corruption index)
Present clear and informative visualizations on the quantity and main reasons of protests as well as the social indicators of unemployment rate and corruption index. This will be done through maps and linear regressions.
Determine the usefulness of protests and determine if they can improve a country’s socio-economic state.
