The prevalence of protests has shown that no country is exempted, regardless of the socio-economic and political factors. Theories attempting to explain the increase in protests suggest the increasing of economic and political inequalities are among the key triggers. The Arab Spring in the Middle East and North Africa, between 2020 and 2012, consists of some of the major protests in the recently ended decade. By looking at the number of reasons behind the protests, our project aimed to bring attention to the upwards trend of protests and whether the protests can potentially lead to change.
 
From the evolution graphs introduced in the literature review and motivations section, it can be concluded that high unemployment rate was a significant factor in causing the Arab Spring demonstrations. It was also noted that political instability also influenced protests, and as such we decided to look at the corruption index as well. Through an analysis of the Choropleth maps, it could be proved that political instability was correlated to increased protests. This is because many protests spurred due to democratization as the reasons for protests were either against social restrictions or politicians' removal. As a result, this project decided to analyze whether or not these demonstrations improved the economic and political situation in specific countries.

After analysis of the Choropleth maps, it can be determined that there is a general upward trend in protests throughout the world. On a more specific note, the Arab Spring countries had more protests, around 90 to 110. We then analyzed two specific countries within the Arab Spring with similar political regimes but resulted in different trends, Yemen and Tunisia. It was concluded that Yemen’s protests led to violence, while Tunisia’s protests improved the situation. As such, we were able to draw on specific aspects of their political context which may explain why these two countries had different results.

The analysis of the correlation between the number of protests and the CPI score produced mixed results. P-values for Bahrain, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia produced statistically insignificant outcomes. To this end, the changes in the CPI index are only somewhat explainable by changes in the number of protests. In 2008, 2011, and 2017, when the protests hit a peak, the CPI index either stabilized or initiated an increasing trend indicating attempts to stabilize the country following the protests. Of the countries analyzed, however, 6 had significant p- and r-squared values indicating that increased frequency of protests may lead to an improvement in political stability. The hypothesis, however, was not true for Syria, Saudi Arabia, Algeria, and Morocco. For these countries, the possible explanation is that internal and external factors prohibited the success of the protests leading to little or no changes in leadership.
 
Further, the expectation that the unemployment rate will reduce with an increase in protests was not realized. Instead, it was only positive for countries like Kuwait that had an r-squared value of greater than 0.4. In essence, there is not a positive correlation between the number of protests and rates of unemployment. What stands out, however, is that high rates of unemployment can lead to protests. Since the unemployment rate is not affected by protests, economic development as a result of reduced rates of unemployment is not necessarily a result of protests.

This project might also have a broader intention. Studying protests is crucial to understand the evolution of democracy. Indeed, protesting is the way people shape power, politics, and economics. Indeed, we have seen that the consequences of protests are tangible in a country as it can profoundly change a political system in place for decades. Thus, this project could help better understand these political mutation processes through population empowerment and the risks it represents. Of course, our project only considers corruption and unemployment rates, which are not enough to provide a complete analysis of protests. We would need far more social indicators to draw adequate conclusions. However, we are still contributing on a small scale to these new critical protest studies.
