https://www.brookings.edu/blog/future-development/2020/01/29/why-are-people-protesting/
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/protest
https://www.adl.org/education/resources/tools-and-strategies/the-purpose-and-power-of-protest

What are protests?

According to the Cambridge Dictionary, a protest can be defined simply as “a strong complaint expressing disagreement, disapproval, or opposition” (cite). However, protests are much more complex than the definition that this dictionary gives heed to. Protests can take on various forms, including but not limited to marches, sit-ins, petitions, strikes and boycotts. They could be peaceful or could cause armed conflicts. Finally, as the definition states, protests occur to express feelings of opposition and suggests an overarching goal to demand change. It is important to note that the goals of protests can differ, with potential reasons being: bringing awareness and knowledge to perceived injustices, influencing public opinions, pushing for certain public policies and connecting with and inspiring those who share similar sentiments on the issue at hand (cite). As such, it is difficult to generalize protests into a simplified meaning and one must consider all the different contexts when evaluating these events. 

Why are people protesting?

In recent years, the number of protests have increased greatly, spiking during the year of the Arab Spring in 2011 and continuing this growing trend ever since (cite). Today, protests are considered to “have become a common phenomenon” with them happening everywhere in the world, in all different contexts; developed or developing, high inequality or low inequality, democratic or autocratic, it seems no country can hide from this form of public unrest. What has caused protests to increase? Why are people protesting more today? Many have tried to find ways to answer these questions by looking at the root: the triggers that cause protests. One of the dominant theories that looks at the fuels of protests noted that grievances related to relative deprivation have been shown to increase the probability of protests occurring. This relative deprivation is felt from witnessing a gap between expectations and achievements (https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315631073). A second theory is based on the fact that high and increasing economic inequality leads to poor social cohesion and can cause a detriment to political stability (https://www.jstor.org/stable/2095339). This research will be focussing on the latter and exploring the effects of economic and political pressure on protests.

The Arab Spring is a pro-democracy movement that took place in the Middle East and North Africa from 2010 to mid-2012 against their authoritarian state. It started with the so-called Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia and then spread in Libya, Egypt, Yemen, Syria and Bahrain, where either rulers deposed or sustained riots continued for years. This movement is caused by the opposition to authoritarian regimes and an overall low standard of living. The standard of living is related to employment rate, income, life expectancy, education, and food and health access. The Arab Spring could also relate to this paradox between an increase in education in the region and a poor labor market. Indeed, eight of the top twenty countries in the ranking regarding schooling increase are part of the Arab League, including Tunisia, Egypt and Lybia. According to Huntington (1968, p. 48), the high unemployment rate for young people is related to the fact that higher education in many modernizing countries cannot provide skills relevant to the countries' needs, creating instability. Thus, high educated students that struggle to find work might be more potentially involved in the protests.
 As we aim to study the causes of protests, we will draw on two social indexes to understand the potential correlation with the protests: corruption and unemployment rates, as it seems that it may be the most valuable variables to our topic. Unemployment is particularly interesting as it also represents well the state of the economy in different countries. 
We assume that the Middle East is constituted of 16 countries: Egypt, Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Syria, Jordan, United Arab Emirates, Israel, Lebanon, Oman, Palestine, Kuwait, Qatar and Bahrain, and North Africa has Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, and Sudan. We could also include other countries in both regions, but as the Arab Spring is our main focus, we aim to restrain our study area to the places where these revolutions happened. We will use Tunisia and Yemen as more concrete examples because of the impressive number of protests there. In Tunisia, the Jasmine Revolution was a popular uprising against corruption, poverty, and political repression, which led to the destitution of President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali in January 2011. It started by the immolation of Mohammed Bouazizi, a young fruit and vegetable vendor in Sidi Bouzid in front of a local municipal office after being mistreated by police, leading to the first demonstrations in this city. The protests sustained even when the police started to shot the people until the president fled to Saudi Arabia and was charged for manslaughter, drug trafficking, and conspiracy against the state. This successful uprising had not been so successful everywhere.  In Yemen, President Ali Abd Allāh Sālih were holding power for three decades, binding it to an economic underdevelopment stage and remaining a fractious tribal society. In late January 2011, thousands of protesters gathered in Sanaa and other cities to destitute Ṣāliḥ. The demonstrations took place with little violence between protesters and security officers. Then, Salih made several economic concessions, such as reducing income taxes and increasing government employees' salaries. Salih loyalists opened fire on protesters on March 18, killing at least 50 people. Even as clashes intensified between police and protesters, Salih still refused several times to sign the GCC agreement that would remove him from power. After being the victim of a criminal attempt to his life by a bomb explosion in its palace, he finally transferred his authority to Vice President Hadi.


Campante, F., & Chor, D. (2012). Why was the Arab World Poised for Revolution? Schooling, Economic Opportunities, and the Arab Spring. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(2), 167-187. Retrieved December 11, 2020, from http://www.jstor.org/stable/41495309
