INTRODUCTION

What are protests?

According to the Cambridge Dictionary, a protest can be defined simply as “a strong complaint expressing disagreement, disapproval, or opposition” (cite). However, protests are much more complex than this definition lets on. Protests can take on various forms, including but not limited to marches, sit-ins, petitions, strikes and boycotts, ranging in severity from peaceful demonstrations to violent struggles. Finally, as the definition states, protests occur to express feelings of opposition and suggests an overarching goal to demand change. It is important to note that the goals of protests can differ, with potential reasons being: bringing awareness and knowledge to perceived injustices, influencing public opinions, pushing for certain public policies, and connecting with and inspiring those with similar sentiments on the issue at hand (cite). As such, it is difficult to generalize protests into such a simplified meaning and its meaning must be considered in all contexts when evaluating these events. For our research purposes, we will use the definition for protests provided in the protests dataset that we used. Each protest considered within the dataset must have more than 50 participants to be added to the count. Furthermore, these protests must be covered by articles in the New York Times, Washington Post, Christian Science Monitor, Times of London, and Jerusalem Post containing the keywords: Protest, Demonstration, Riot or Mass mobilization.

Why are people protesting?

In recent years, the quantity of protests have increased greatly, with 2008 marking a pivotal point for the growth of protests. This can be attributed to the global economic crisis that left millions of people without a job and led to many years of inflation. This crisis had tremendous social consequences such as famines that probably contributed to this global trend of anti-system revolts characterized by the rejection of the State in place and the economy that exploits the poor and the environment. Furthermore, as shown in the graph below, there was a dramatic spike in protests in 2011, which can be attributed to the democracy movement dubbed as the Arab Spring. 

Today, protests “have become a common phenomenon” with them happening globally, regardless of the country’s political or socio-economic factors. From developed or developing, high inequality or low inequality, and democratic or autocratic countries, it seems that no country can hide from this form of public unrest (cite). What has caused protests to increase? Why are people protesting more today? Many have tried to find ways to answer these questions by looking at the root: the triggers of protests. One dominant theory regarding the causes of protests suggests that grievances related to the relative deprivation of expectations and achievements have been shown to increase the probability of protests occurring (https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315631073). A second theory posits that high and increasing economic inequality leads to poor social cohesion and can damage political stability (https://www.jstor.org/stable/2095339). This research will be based on the latter theory and exploring how protests may improve the economic and political inequalities in a country. 

