The world map represents the average world protests from 2000 to 2020. We can see that the world average is around 90 protests in total except for some countries that had much more, such as France, Germany, China, Russia, Brazil, and India. Thus, the number of protests is relatively high in the 21st century, which shows a common trend. Even if demonstrations are quite scattered around the world, we can see an incredibly high rate of them in Western Europe. Indeed, Europe has historically known many protests as the left-wing parties, and trade unions are very present in the political landscape and "worked together to achieve political and social reforms using protest activities first, followed by electoral success" (Torcal, Rodon & Hierro 2015:331). Protesting as a mode to access more rights and equality in society became popular with the Marxism and bolshevism revolution in 1917. Thus, protesting for social justice has been quite common since this period, especially for women's rights, climate change actions, and more reforms helping the impoverished.  
We can also see that in Egypt, Yemen, Iraq, and Turkey, many protests happened. Let us focus on the Middle East's case to look at the characteristics of the Arab Spring.
In the Middle East and North African map, during the Arab Spring, we can see a more significant number of protests, around 90 to 110. We can also see that the overall reasons for protesting are related to democratization as they are either against social restrictions or politicians' removal. Uprisings are the consequences of patrimonialism, an autocratic or oligarchic political system where all the power comes from the leaders and where the different hierarchies are dependent or codependent. Thus, power is often hereditary, and the leaders keep choosing and rearranging governments as they wish. Also, these regimes all know a high corruption degree. This context may explain the uprisings of the Arab Spring and the violent reactions of the authoritarian regimes as they often killed and wounded protesters in the first place.
However, this map only gives an overview of the Middle East protests, and we aim to understand the specificities of these protests in the region. Thus, we will look at two case studies where the number of demonstrations is very contrasted, Yemen and Tunisia.
In Yemen, according to the map three hundred protests took place in the last two decades. When the first protests arose during the Arab Spring, the regime in place was an 'autocratic officer-politician' regime as president Ali Abdullah Saleh was a former military officer. He founded his power on its army and the tribes (Kamrava, 2000). After the beginning of the protests, the armed forces fractured as some generals defected and joined the rebels. The rebels were constituted by citizens and by the Houthi armed movement.The protests have rapidly turned very violent as the police officer started to kill the protesters and the rebels answered as violently as they hold four times as many firearms as the State's army. The uprisings also arose because of the corruption in place where powerful commanders from the president's family misappropriate funds from Yemen's vast military budget. They also used 'fictitious soldiers' and received the financial resources that they would use to feed and pay these soldiers. (Lutterbeck, 2011:37). Yemen's primary source of wealth was its oil resources, but the overall population did not receive any of this wealth. Thus, the country is still considered one of the poorest countries in the Middle East. The Yemen war was also conditioned by other nations that took part in the conflict, mainly because of their oil interests. The Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) tried to destitute Saleh many times by proposing peace deals. After a year of protests, on 23 November 2011, the president Ali Abdullah al-Saleh finally signed an agreement with the GCC to transfer power to his vice president, Abd Rabbo Mansour Hadi. The war started when the rebels took over the capital Sana'a in September 2014 and declared a general mobilization to overthrow Hadi. A high degree of patrimonialism, a deinstitutionalized army, and a close linkage between the military and society catalyzed the army's division (Lutterbeck 2011:40). Thus, even if Saleh was deposed, Yemen is considered by the ONU as the worst humanitarian crisis in 2014 as famines and violence touch 14 million people. Yemen's case is extreme, and it illustrates the many intricacies around the protests in the Middle East.
In Tunisia, according to the map, protests have been less critical. In contrast to Yemen, it ends up in a much more peaceful way. It was the first Arab country to experience such a widespread upheaval, and the long-standing ruler, Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali was finally removed from power. General and deep dissatisfactions due to corruption, high prices, unemployment, and political oppression triggered protests. In the beginning, protests were peaceful, but the violence escalated when police used teargas to break up the demonstrations ending up in two deaths from police bullets. When the demonstrations grew in size and demands in the whole country, the armed forces had to confront them. However, the Tunisian military had a strong connection with the society and shared the anti-regime complaints, and soldiers immediately fraternized with the protesters (Lutterbeck 2011:22). The army was left behind by Ben Ali that relied more on its internal security and intelligence agencies to suppress internal dissidents. The institutionalization and depoliticization of the military come from the country's first leader, Habib Bourgiba. On 14 January, Ben Ali left the country, and the Tunisian military continued to fight the former regime's remnants. Thus, a transition government took place peacefully before the new elections.
Thus, these two contrasting cases illustrate how protests that arise from similar political and economic causes led to very different situations. Indeed, both countries were in an 'autocratic officer-politician,' corrupted regimes where the wealth was unequally redistributed. In both cases, the police shot in the crowd and killed citizens. The army helped in the two countries but not at the same expense, which may help understand why Tunisia's protests were more successful. In Tunisia, the military supported the protesters, whereas some officers only joined the rebels in Yemen. From these two cases, we can start to draw on the conditions of a protest's success. Indeed, a depoliticized and institutionalized army has been a great help in avoiding chaos in Tunisia. It also helped during the transition to democracy. Yemen struggled to unify its army and commanders, and the rebels transformed the pacific protests into a violent path.
In the next part, we will draw on the protests' political and economic consequences to dig further in the notion of protest success.
 

