To discuss whether or not the Arab Spring had an impact on the political stability of the Arab region, we will need to analyse the relationship between protests and political indicators. We’ll start off by performing linear regression on the dataset since the year 2000, with the number of protests as the independent variable and the CPI score as the dependent variable. 
In order to analyse the correlation of the two variables and determine its significance, we will take two parameters into consideration: the p-values and the r-squared values. The p-values will test the null hypothesis of the correlation – in other words, it is a way to determine how significant the correlation is between the two variables. Generally, a p-value of less than 0.05 indicates a strong relationship between the variable and the target. The other statistical parameter we will consider is the r-squared value. The r-squared value indicates the ‘accuracy’ of the regression model. This measures the changes in behaviour of the dependent variable that can be explained using that of the independent variable. The closer the value is to 1, the more the independent variable can be used to explain changes in the dependent variable. 
If we apply this to all the 14 countries on our list, the result is as shown below. A lot of the countries’ regression models produce ‘good’ p-values, with a few exceptions in Algeria (0.053), Libya (0.058), and Oman (0.27). However, we must also examine the r-squared values to determine if the correlation is genuine. When we do, we can see that the vast majority of the r-squared values of the models (Eleven out of fourteen) are between 0 and 0.4, which indicates that changes in the CPI index are only somewhat explainable by changes in the number of protests for most of the countries. Although this seems to be signalling a poor correlation, we will now analyse this finding in more detail to test this.
One country with notably significant scores is Iraq, with a p-value of 0.00001 and a r-squared value of 0.713 – this shows a case with a relatively strong correlation between the number of protests and the CPI score since 2000 in Iraq. To analyse the changes in the variables in more detail, we can look at the changes in the two variables over time and compare their trends. In the two graphs below that show the number of protests and CPI scores over time, we can see that Iraq has generally been a politically unstable country, with highly fluctuating values in both categories. However, upon closer inspection, a trend can be seen amidst the seemingly arbitrary values  – in years where the number of protests hit a peak (2008, 2011, 2013, and 2015), the CPI scores started to stabilise (2011 and 2013) or even started an increasing trend (2008 and 2015). There could be two possible explanations for this trend – either there were attempts to stabilise the country after the spikes in protesting, resulting in a better CPI value, or this is a coincidence that only accounts for the trend of one country. To test the former hypothesis, we can perform another series of linear regressions for years in which the number of protests peaked. This, naturally, were the years since 2009 and 2010, when the Arab Spring took place – so we created the same regression model as before, but since the year 2008 (to account for countries with increases in protests before the official start of the Arab Spring in 2010). 
The results of this test were quite positive – most of the countries still had a p-value in the acceptable range (although all of them had increased p-values, which is natural as p-values increase as the number of datapoints decrease), and the r-squared values were telling of a much more accurate regression model. Ten out of the fourteen countries had an r-squared value of 0.45 or more, with eight of the fourteen with 0.45 or more, which is indicative of a rather accurate regression model. This could be evidential to the hypothesis that protests, especially those during the Arab Spring, were quite successful in bringing relative stability in some of the Arab nations, albeit temporary. However, there are exceptions to this, with countries like Algeria, Oman, and Yemen showing low correlations. This can also be seen the graphs of the variables over time, since it is notable that in years with the peaks in the number of protests, the CPI scores of the aforementioned countries do not follow an increasing/stable trend that is shown in the other countries. This can be due to several reasons, but the most likely one would be that other internal national struggles prevented the protests from being successful.
